.TH SOUND_EFFECTS_PLAYER 1 2017-06-11 ShowControl
.SH NAME
sound_effects_player \- play sound effects for a live stage play
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sound_effects_player 
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIinput_file\fR] 

.SH DESCRIPTION
Community theatre often needs miscellaneous sounds to accompany a
performance.  This program provides a convenient and flexible way
to make those sounds.  It reads an XML file prepared by the
sound effects designer which describes all of the sounds for
the performance, then interacts with the sound effects operator
to make those sounds at the appropriate times.
.P
The input file is an XML file that describes the sounds and when 
to make them.  See the file How_to_Use_the_Sound_Effects_Player.pdf
for details.  If the file is not specified it can be read using
the graphic user interface.
.P
This program can be used interactively and can also be run by an
external sequencer which sends commands to it.  Both interactive
and remote commands can be used together.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Prints a brief description of the program and how to invoke it.
To see all of the options used by GTK and Gstreamer, type
\fB\-\-help-all\fR.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-process\-id\-file =\fIpid\-file\fR
Writes the process ID on the specified file.  This lets a script
find the process of the instance of sound_effects_player that it has
just launched, so the script can send signals to it.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-monitor\-file =\fIsound-output\-file\fR
Writes the sound produced into a WAV file.  This option adds a 
lot of latency, and so is mainly useful for debugging.  
The default is not to write the sound into a WAV file.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-audio\-output =\fBnone\fR | \fBALSA\fR | \fBJack\fR | \fBPulse\fR
Controls the audio output.  None means do no audio output, 
but the WAV file specified by \-\-monitor\-file will still 
be written.
\fBALSA\fR means output using the Advanced Linux Sound Architecture, 
which is the default.  
\fBJack\fR and \fBPulse\fR are not yet implemented.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-device\-name =\fIname\fR
If audio_output is ALSA (either explicitly or by default) do 
output to this ALSA device.  To see the list of ALSA devices, 
type \fBaplay \-L\fR.
The default is device \(aqdefault\(aq.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-trace\-file =\fItrace-output\-file\fR
Traces the execution of the sequencer into a text file.
This is useful when you have a complex sound sequence, and
need feedback about what it is doing.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-trace\-sequencer\-level =\fInumber\fR
The degree of sequencer tracing detail.  0 means none, 1 means all.
.TP
.BR \-\-display =\fIdisplay\fR
X display to use for sound effects operator interaction.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
This program makes heavy use of Gstreamer version 1, and provides
two custom elements: gstlooper and gstenvelope.  When you install 
sound_effects_player, these elements are stored on
\fI/usr/local/lib/gstreamer-1.0\fR.
Therefore, to run sound_effects_player you will first have to type

$ \fBexport GST_PLUGIN_PATH=/usr/local/lib/gstreamer-1.0 \fR 

Messages to the sound effects operator are displayed using 
GTK version 3.

.SH SIGNALS
.IP SIGTERM
On receipt ot this signal, sound_effects_player stops making
sound and exits.
.IP SIGHUP
On receipt of this signal, sound_effects_player stops making
sound, re-reads its project file, and starts over.  This
is useful if an external editor is modifying the sound
effects.  It is not yet implemented.

.SH FILES
The input file is an XML file which describes the complete
production.  Sound_effects_player extracts only the sound
effects from this file.  The project XML file can refer to
other XML files.
All of the XML files are expected to be created using an XML 
editor such as EMACS.

There are three optional output files: one records the PID
of the program for signalling purposes, one records the sounds
produced and one traces what the sequencer is doing.
See above for how to specify them.

.SH NOTES
Sound_effects_player interacts with the sound effects operator 
until all sounds have been played, at which time it exits.  

Sound_effects_player is still under active development; 
many features planned for version 1 are not yet implemented.

Sound_effects_player is a component of ShowControl, which also
contains components for handling microphones and lights for
community theatre.  However, like the other components, it 
can be used on its own.

.SH EXAMPLE
.IP "sound_effects_player sample/Sample_project.xml"
Read file Sample_project.xml in the sample directory,
extract the sound effects from the description of the project,
and play them under the interactive control of the sound effects
operator on the default ALSA output device.
When the last sound finishes playing, exit.
.IP "sound_effects_player -d hdmi:CARD=NVidia,DEV=0 sample/Sample_project.xml"
The same except the sound is sent to the speakers on one
of the video monitors.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR CuePlayer (1),
.BR ShowControl (1)

